Name Ikwuazom Somtoo Innocent
Reg No: 2020/HND/30985/CS
Differences between web1 Web 2 and web 3
In Web 1.0 advertisements on websites while surfing the internet are banned. Also, in Web 1.0, Ofoto is an online digital photography website, on which users could store, share, view, and print digital pictures. Web 1.0 is a content delivery network (CDN) that enables the showcase of the piece of information on the websites. It can be used as a personal website. It costs the user as per pages viewed. 
Four Design Essentials of a Web 1.0 Site Include:
Static pages.
Content is served from the server’s file system.
Pages built using Server Side Includes or Common Gateway Interface (CGI).
Frames and Tables are used to position and align the elements on a page.
Web 2.0 
2004 When the word Web 2.0 become famous due to the First Web 2.0 conference (later known as the Web 2.0 summit) held by Tim O’Reilly and Dale Dougherty, the term was coined by Darcy DiNucci in 1999.
The web browser technologies are used in Web 2.0 development and it includes AJAX and JavaScript frameworks. Recently, AJAX and JavaScript frameworks have become a very popular means of creating web 2.0 sites. 

 Five Major Features of Web 2.0:
Free sorting of information, permits users to retrieve and classify the information collectively.
Dynamic content that is responsive to user input.
Information flows between the site owner and site users using evaluation & online commenting.
Developed APIs to allow self-usage, such as by a software application.
Web access leads to concerns different, from the traditional Internet user base to a wider variety of users.
As such, the end-user is not only a user of the application but also a participant in these 8 tools mentioned below:
Podcasting
Blogging
Tagging
Curating with RSS
Social bookmarking
Social networking
Social media
Web content voting

Web 3.0 
It refers to the evolution of web utilization and interaction which includes altering the Web into a database, with the integration of DLT (Distributed Ledger Technology blockchain is an example) and that data can help to make Smart Contracts based on the needs of the individual. It enables the up-gradation of the back-end of the web, after a long time of focusing on the front-end (Web 2.0 has mainly been about AJAX, tagging, and other fr hiont-end user-experience innovation). Web 3.0 is a term that is used to describe many evolutions of web usage and interaction among several paths. In this, data isn’t owned but instead shared but still be, where services show different views for the same web / the same data.

The Semantic Web (3.0) promises to establish “the world’s information” in a more reasonable way than Google can ever attain with its existing engine schema. This is particularly true from the perspective of machine conception as opposed to human understanding. The Semantic Web necessitates the use of a declarative ontological language like OWL to produce domain-specific ontologies that machines can use to reason about information and make new conclusions, not simply match keywords. 

Main features That can Help us Define Web 3.0:

Semantic Web 
The succeeding evolution of the Web involves the Semantic Web. The semantic web improves web technologies in demand to create, share and connect content through search and analysis based on the capability to comprehend the meaning of words, rather than on keywords or numbers.
Artificial Intelligence 
Combining this capability with natural language processing, in Web 3.0, computers can distinguish information like humans to provide faster and more relevant results. They become more intelligent to fulfill the requirements of users.
3D Graphics 
The three-dimensional design is being used widely in websites and services in Web 3.0. Museum guides, computer games, e-commerce, geospatial contexts, etc. are all examples that use 3D graphics.
Connectivity 
With Web 3.0, information is more connected thanks to semantic metadata. As a result, the user experience evolves to another level of connectivity that leverages all the available information.
