Differentiate between NoSQL and SQL
The dynamic schemata of NoSQL databases allow representation of alternative structures, often alongside each other, encouraging greater flexibility. There is less emphasis on planning, greater freedom when adding new attributes or fields, and the possibility of varied syntax across databases. As a group, however, NoSQL languages lack the standard interface which SQL provides, so more complex queries can be difficult to execute.

Though there are many dialects of SQL, all share a common syntax and almost-identical grammar. When querying relational databases, fluency in one language translates to proficiency in most others. On the other hand, there is very little consistency between NoSQL languages, as they concern a diverse set of unrelated technologies. Many NoSQL databases have a unique data manipulation language constrained by particular structures and capabilities.
Main Navigation
Products
Talend Data Fabric
The unified platform for reliable, accessible data
Data integration
Application and API integration
Data integrity and governance
Powered by Talend Trust Score
Stitch
Fully-managed data pipeline for analytics
Solutions
Industries
Financial services
Healthcare
Government
Retail
Telecommunications
Departments
Operations
Sales
Marketing
Product intelligence
Initiatives
Cloud data lakes
Customer 360
Risk and compliance
Cloud data warehouse
Data privacy
See all »
Pricing
Partners
Technology
Snowflake
AWS
Azure
Databricks
Google
Cloudera
Channel
Partners
Find a Partner
Partner Portal login
Partner training
Why Talend
Why Talend
About us
Customers
Support and services
Community
Help center
Resources
Resource center
Knowledge center
White papers
Webinars
Blog
Events
Free Trial
Log in
International Sites
Français
Deutsch
Italiano
日本語
SQL vs NoSQL: Differences, Databases, and Decisions
Knowledge center» Data Fabric» What is Data Processing?» SQL vs NoSQL: Differences, Databases, an…
From analysts and engineers to IT decision makers, many are familiar with Relational Database Management Systems (RDBMS) and the Structured Query Language (SQL) used to interact with them. While these terms refer to a decades-old paradigm which remains a wide standard, today the sheer variety and depth of database systems can be dizzying. What’s more, rising volumes of unstructured data, availability of storage and processing power, and evolving analytic requirements have generated interest in fundamentally different technologies.

Collectively known as NoSQL, these popular alternatives to traditional RDBMSs show promise for a variety of modern use cases.

To make informed decisions about which to use, practitioners should be aware of the differences between SQL, NoSQL, individual Database Management Systems (DBMS) and languages, as well as the situations each is best-suited for, and how the landscape is changing.

SQL vs NoSQL: Five Main Differences
SQL is the programming language used to interface with relational databases. (Relational databases model data as records in rows and tables with logical links between them). NoSQL is a class of DBMs that are non-relational and generally do not use SQL.

There are five practical differences between SQL and NoSQL:

Language
Scalability
Structure
Properties
Support and communities
1. Language
SQL has been around for over 40 years, so it is recognizable, documented, and widely-used. Safe and versatile, it’s particularly well suited for complex queries. However, SQL restricts the user to working within a predefined tabular schema, and more care must be taken to organize and understand the data before it is used.

The dynamic schemata of NoSQL databases allow representation of alternative structures, often alongside each other, encouraging greater flexibility. There is less emphasis on planning, greater freedom when adding new attributes or fields, and the possibility of varied syntax across databases. As a group, however, NoSQL languages lack the standard interface which SQL provides, so more complex queries can be difficult to execute.

Though there are many dialects of SQL, all share a common syntax and almost-identical grammar. When querying relational databases, fluency in one language translates to proficiency in most others. On the other hand, there is very little consistency between NoSQL languages, as they concern a diverse set of unrelated technologies. Many NoSQL databases have a unique data manipulation language constrained by particular structures and capabilities.

2. Scalability
Most SQL databases can be scaled vertically, by increasing the processing power of existing hardware. NoSQL databases use a master-slave architecture which scales better horizontally, with additional servers or nodes. These are useful generalizations, but it’s important to note:

SQL databases can be scaled horizontally as well, though sharding or partitioning logic is often the user’s onus and not well supported.
NoSQL technologies are diverse and while many rely on the master-slave architecture, options for scaling vertically also exist.
Savings made using more efficient data structures can overwhelm differences in scalability; most important is to understand the use case and plan accordingly.
SQL database schemata always represent relational, tabular data, with rules about consistency and integrity. They contain tables with columns (attributes) and rows (records), and keys have constrained logical relationships.

NoSQL databases need not stick to this format, but generally fit into one of four broad categories:

Column-oriented databases transpose row-oriented RDBMSs, allowing efficient storage of high-dimensional data and individual records with varying attributes.
Key-Value stores are dictionaries which access diverse objects with a key unique to each.
Document stores hold semi-structured data: objects which contain all of their own relevant information, and which can be completely different from each other.
Graph databases add the concept of relationships (direct links between objects) to documents, allowing rapid traversal of greatly connected data sets.
